WILLIAM BRANGHAM: On this
Independence Day, many Americans
will no doubt be enjoying a
beer or two.
One of the essential
ingredients in beer is yeast.
But, for 600 years, only two
species of yeast, ale yeast
and lager yeast, have been used
for traditional brewing.
But now a lab in North Carolina
may have found a third species,
and they found it in the
strangest of places,
on bees and wasps.
"NewsHour" science
producer Nsikan Akpan
and our "ScienceScope"
team reveal what the buzz
is all about.
NSIKAN AKPAN: It feels like
beer brewers will do anything
to spice up their booze.
There's pizza beer, banana
split chocolate stout, beer
with squid ink, and, of course,
Rocky Mountain oyster
stout, which is flavored
with bull testicles.
All this fuss seems silly, when
the foundation of alcohol's
flavor is plain old yeast.
Yeast, these little
microbes that take sugars
and ferment them into
alcohol, define a beer's
character.
Yet, for 10,000 years,
beers have essentially
relied on two types of
bland yeast that basically
add no flavors.
Now a lab in North Carolina
has discovered a new yeast
species that produces an array
of flavors without
added ingredients.
Where did they find it?
On bees.
The story of bumblebeer
begins at North Carolina
State University, in
the lab of Rob Dunn.
Once a tropical forest
ecologist, Dunn now explores the
jungle that surrounds us, the
one filled with
bugs and microbes.
ROB DUNN, North Carolina State
University: At some point,
my lab shifted to focusing
more on people's daily
lives, and that includes
food, and it includes
thinking about the biology
of food.
NSIKAN AKPAN: One day three
years ago, a colleague
inquired if the lab
knew of any microbes in
the environment
capable of making beer.
Dunn and company instantly
considered insect pollinators,
like bees and wasps.
Here's why.
Yeast hang out in flower
nectar, where the microbes feast
on the boatloads of sugar.
They then produce or ferment
sweet aromas, which then
attract the buzzing bugs.
ROB DUNN: We actually
think, based on some
work from colleagues in
Italy, that it's very
likely that those first beers
and breads were relying on
yeasts from insects, too.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Back then, a bug
carrying a fermenting yeast
may have fallen into some
wet grain.
And, boom, welcome
to the booze cruise.
In fact, some scientists argue
human agriculture started just
to mass produce grains to make
beer.
The more beer we drink, the
more yeast we have to grow.
ROB DUNN: Unambiguously,
the most successful organism
in the world is yeast.
And so if you think about all
of the yeasts we make everywhere
for many of the products
we make, they won.
NSIKAN AKPAN: But, today, where
would you even start looking
for a new beer-making yeast?
ANNE MADDEN, North Carolina
State University: Part of this
is science, and part of this
feels more like an art
that's hard to describe.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Meet Anne Madden,
the Dunn lab's microbe wrangler.
To search for unknown yeast,
she started by catching a
wild bee and a wild wasp.
She then transferred
every microbe from their
bodies to a petri dish.
Don't fret.
She didn't commit
mass bug-icide.
ANNE MADDEN: To make bumblebeer
and all of the different
bumblebeers that we have made
since, we have killed two bugs.
You have likely killed more
bugs on your way to a bar to get
beer than we did in the process
of making it.
NSIKAN AKPAN: A couple
days later, a forest of
microbes appear on the dish.
Then, in four steps,
Madden combines her
senses with technology.
First, she looks to separate the
yeast from bacteria or fungi.
ANNE MADDEN: It's about
understanding when something
glistens in a certain way.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Next, she picks
a handful of yeast candidates,
grows them on a new dish,
and then follows her nose.
ANNE MADDEN: You can smell
the same smell both on that
plate and in that final beer.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Her third task
is running the DNA from these
candidates through a national
database to ensure her
picks don't cause disease.
ANNE MADDEN: It's almost like
a Google search through all
other species that exist that
have been documented.
NSIKAN AKPAN: The final step
is a chemical test, because
despite the long history of
brewing, the genes and enzymes
responsible for fermentation
are largely unknown.
The survivors of this gauntlet
land with John Sheppard at N.C.
State's research brew house.
JOHN SHEPPARD, North
Carolina State University:
In traditional beers that
are lighter in character,
like the traditional
American lager, for
example, you don't want to
overwhelm your taste, and
so what the yeast does
is very important.
A lot of wild yeasts, which
are considered contamination
in a normal brewing process,
the reason why they're not
wanted is because they produce
a lot of off-flavors that are
not really desirable
in the beer.
So, to get a wild yeast
that doesn't produce these
off-flavors can be difficult.
So, we did a little testing
to see whether or not the
yeast strains would be able to
make beer, and we selected one.
It came from a wasp, because
this special yeast not only
makes ethanol, but makes acid,
and, as a result of that,
we had a natural sour beer.
NSIKAN AKPAN: The bumblebeer
yeast makes other flavors too,
like a sweet honey taste without
the addition of actual honey.
Craft sour beers often take
months or years to make.
Bumblebeer yeast can do the
same in a matter of weeks.
Local brewers have taken notice.
The first suds made with
bumblebeer yeast rolled
out earlier this year.
Until next time, I'm
Nsikan Akpan, and this
is "ScienceScope" from
the "PBS NewsHour."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Nsikan tasted
one of those beers and said
that it was quite delicious.
You can read about how
scientists are using
this discovery to find
more beer-producing
yeasts made in the wild.
That's on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.